8th International Conference on LCA in the Agri-Food Sector, Rennes, France, 2-4 October 2012 

LCA of Starch Potato From Field To Starch Production Plant Gate 
 
Godard Caroline1,*, Boissy Joachim1, Suret Camille1, Gabrielle Benoît2 
 

1 Agro-Transfert Ressources et Territoires, 2 Chaussée Brunehaut, 80200 Estrées-Mons, France 
2 INRA-AgroParisTech, UMR 1091 Environnement et Grandes Cultures, 78850 Thiverval-Grignon, France 
 Corresponding author. E-mail: c.godard@agro-transfert-rt.org 
 

ABSTRACT 
To provide accurate agricultural LCA, the local production conditions, namely crop management techniques, weather and soil condi-
tions, need to be taken into account. To develop adapted inventory methodology, a specific LCA study was carried out on a northern 
France starch potato supply area. It focused on the upstream steps and used specific crop management and logistics data. To improve 
inventory methods, the approach is based on process-based models simulating soil carbon dynamic and in-field pesticide emissions. 
The results obtained for 1 ton of potato showed the influence of soil carbon dynamic on climate change impact that resulted in carbon 
release between 10% and 18%. This level was mitigated by the soil carbon sequestration effect from the preceding catch crop. The 
soil type influence was limited due to rather homogenous pedoclimatic conditions. Nevertheless, the proposed approach enabled to 
account for specific cropping conditions and was designed to test various production scenarios. 
 
Keywords: Starch potato LCA, inventory methods, emission models, Soil organic carbon, pesticide emissions 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 

Starch currently provides basic molecules for many  innovative industrial applications, mainly non-food 
processes.  Potato  is  the  most  common  crop  that  produces  starch  in  Northern  France.  To  provide  LCA  of 
starch derived molecules and products with accurate and consistent data, a focus was made on the upstream 
processes, from potato field production to the gate of the starch processing plant. To do so, a specific LCA 
study was carried out on the supply area of a starch production plant located in Picardy. We were thus also 
able to provide local stakeholders (producers, advisers) with the environmental impacts of their production 
chains.  There are currently scant literature references on the LCA of potato crops, moreover, most of them 
focus on food potato (D'Arcy et al., 2010; Williams et al., 2010), which involves crop management practices 
different from those used for starch potato. Hence, to provide adapted and accurate impact assessment, we 
used technical data from starch potato producers and specific logistics chain data. Those data were combined 
to  in-field  fluxes  inventory  methods  using  process-based  models  able  to  integrate  soil  and  weather 
production  conditions,  and  crop  rotation.  More  precisely,  two  models  were  used  to  assess  soil  carbon 
dynamic and pesticide emissions. The objective of this study was thus i/ to identify the contribution of soil 
carbon dynamic in the global warming impact of starch potato upstream production process, and ii/ to focus 
on pesticide spraying which is one of the important potential environmental impacts of potato. Finally, we 
were  also  able  to  partly  test  the  methodology  developed  for  bioenergy  chains  (Godard  et  al.,  2012)  on 
another application field. 

2. Methods 
 
2.1. Studied system and functional unit definition 

 
The studied area corresponded to the specific supply area of a starch production plant in the French Picar-
dy region. A survey of potato growers showed that the main crop rotation including starch potato in this area 
was sugar beet/winter wheat/potato/winter wheat. An intermediate crop (white mustard) was sown before po-
tato planting. The crop management technique sequence selected was the most common one described by lo-
cal technicians and from producer survey (Table 1). The average distance between farm and starch produc-
tion plant was considered to be 60 km, and a specific logistics chain is detailed in Figure 1. 

 
The studied system entails all the field operations from the intermediate crop preceding potato to its har-
vest and transport and storage steps before starch production plant gate. All the machinery, the buildings and 
inputs necessary to those steps were accounted for: fuel and energy consumption, seeds, field fertilizers and 
pesticides, and storage treatment. The functional unit was the production of 1 t of starch potato (with a 22% 
dry matter content).  

 
 

 
 

8th International Conference on LCA in the Agri-Food Sector, Rennes, France, 2-4 October 2012 

Table 1. Input summary of starch potato and catch crop. 
 

Input (unit) 
Average annual yield (t fresh matter/ha) 

Crop management (for 1 year) 

Stubble ploughing (runs) 
Harrowing and catch crop seeding (runs) 
Catch crop crushing (runs) 
Ploughing (runs) 
Harrowing (runs) 
Sowing and ridging up (runs) 
Haulm crushing (runs) 
Lifting (runs) 
Seeding rate (kg/ha) 
N fertilizer rate (kg N / ha) 
K Fertilizer rate (kg K2O /ha) 
P Fertilizer rate (kg P2O5 /ha) 
Magnesium fertilizer rate (kg MgO/ha) 
Pesticide application (kg active ingredient/ha) 

Value 
52 
 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2 
1 
1 
1 
2100 
180 
280 
80 
30 
30.06 

 
 

 

 

 

 
Figure 1. Logistics chain of starch potato. 

2.2. Inventory methods  

 
Life cycle inventories needed for the the manufacturing and supply of inputs and buildings were extracted 

from the Ecoinvent Database Version 2.2 ( Swiss Center for Life Cycle Inventories, 2010).  

In-field emissions of N and P were assessed using and adapting several inventory methods. Direct and in-
direct N2O emissions were assessed according to the IPCC method (IPCC, 2006). NH3 emissions to air were 
calculated using emission factors from Institut de l’élevage et al., 2010. The emission factor for NOx emis-
- to water were estimated with a field N-balance 
sions was derived from ADEME, 2010. Emissions of NO3
method adapted from IFEU, 2000, and which integrates previous N fluxes (N2O, NH3 and NOx). The N bal-
ance depended on crop rotation and soil type. P emissions in water by leaching, run-off and erosion were es-
timated  according  to  Nemecek  and  Kägi,  2007.  Soil  erosion  was  estimated  with  the  Universal  Soil  Loss 
Equation (Weischmeier and Smith, 1965). 

2.3. Modelling approach for soil-carbon dynamic and pesticides emission estimates 
 

To estimate soil C sequestration and pesticide emissions, the AMG (Saffih-Hdadi and Mary, 2008) and 
Pest-LCI (Birkved and Hauschild, 2006) models were used, respectively. AMG simulates the  dynamics of 
humified organic matter, accounting for inputs from preceding and catch crop residues and their humification 
and  mineralization  rates. The  main  inputs  of  the  model  are crop  rotation  and  yields,  soil  management  and 
properties (texture, organic matter and CaCO3 content), and annual weather conditions. The model runs on a 
yearly time-step, and a 20-year series of past weather data (1988-2007) was used to simulate soil carbon se-
questration. The initial Soil Organic Carbon (SOC) content, to which model predictions are very sensitive, 
was estimated for the typical starch potato crop-rotation and soil types combinations determined from meas-
urements of soil organic matter changes in Picardy (Duparque et al., 2011). The major soil type in the studied 

8th International Conference on LCA in the Agri-Food Sector, Rennes, France, 2-4 October 2012 

area was a deep clayey loam that was selected for the parameterization of AMG. The effect of soil type on 
the variations in soil C content over 20 years was also simulated. To do so, the next two soil types in terms of 
occurrence  in the  studied area (namely  a  deep  loam  and  a  clayey  loam  over  chalk)  were  also  input  to  the 
AMG model. 

Pest-LCI  simulates  the  fate  of  pesticides  and  their  emissions  during  application  and  after-application, 
from soils and crop leaves. It simulates the fate of each fraction of pesticide reaching a compartment of the 
simulated  system  (air,  crop,  soil  surface,  water  drainage  system  and  groundwater).  This  model  runs  on  a 
monthly time-step. It accounts for soil and climate conditions as well as bio-physico-chemical properties of 
the pesticide molecule. To ensure consistent results between pesticide emissions and soil C sequestration, the 
same past weather data and soil type as for the AMG simulation were used for Pest-LCI. 
 
2.3. Impact assessment method 

 
In order to focus on the main agricultural environmental impacts, five  mid-point impact categories and 
corresponding reference substances were selected. Climate change (kg CO2-eq), terrestrial acidification (kg 
SO2-eq),  freshwater  eutrophication  (kg  P-eq),  and  marine  eutrophication  (kg  N-eq)  were  calculated  using 
Recipe method, version 1.05 (PRé Consultants, 2008). Ecotoxicity (Comparative Toxic Units – CTU) was 
assessed using USEtox method (Henderson et al., 2011), and energy consumption (MJ) was calculated ac-
cording  to  the  Cumulative  energy  demand  method,  version  1.08.  All  impact  calculations  were  performed 
with SimaPro 7.3.2 software (PRé Consultants, 2011). 

 

3. Results 
 
3.1. Contribution analysis for starch potato 

 
The  hot  spot  for  three  impact  categories  out  of  six  (Figure  2),  namely  climate  change  (CC),  terrestrial 
acidification (TA) and marine eutrophication (ME) was nitrogen fertilization which actually compounds the 
production of fertilizer N and the field emissions. Its share varied from 44% to 70% of the total impacts. The 
CC contribution of N-fertilization mainly came from indirect greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions occurring 
during the production step of fertilizers, while for TA, the contribution was mostly due to the NH3 emissions 
occurring after fertilizer application. The N-fertilization contribution to ME arose from nitrate leaching.  

For freshwater eutrophication (FE), the most impacting stage (with 69% of the total impact) was the other 
fertilization step, PK fertilization, mainly due to phosphate run-off and leaching after P-fertilizer application. 
Ecotoxicity (E) was in turn widely dominated by the contribution of pesticides (including both production 
step  and  in-field  emissions)  up  to  67%.  Contrary  to  other  impact  categories,  cumulative  energy  demand 
(CED) originated from nearly all the life cycle steps with a similar level (between 6% to 19 %), the transport 
phase (to the farm and to the plant) being the major contributor with 40% of the total impact. This transport 
phase often contributes as the second most impacting step to the other impact categories apart from CED.   

One of the specific crop management techniques of potato is seeding. This step was the second after N-
fertilization to ME, mainly due to the nitrate leaching occurring after N-fertilization during potato seed pro-
duction step. 

 

 

8th International Conference on LCA in the Agri-Food Sector, Rennes, France, 2-4 October 2012 

 

 
Figure 2. Contribution to the impact categories of each life cycle step from field production to starch plant 
gate. (CC impact includes both potato and catch crop effect on the deep clayey loam soil carbon). 
 
3.2. Climate change impact and soil carbon dynamic: influence of soil type and intermediate crop  

 
Soil C dynamics was influential in the CC impact, and enhanced the life-cycle GHG emissions of potato 
crops. Without considering the preceding intermediate crop, the latter always resulted in a release of soil C, 
from about 10% up to about 18% of the total GHG emissions (Table 2). Indeed all the potato haulms were 
exported out of field. Nevertheless, it can be noted that the catch crop preceding potato (whose impacts were 
allocated to the potato crop) strongly mitigated this release, with a systematic carbon sequestration reaching 
about 200kgC/ha/year on all the soil types. Thus the catch crop could even more than offset the soil C release 
of potato, and reaching, for example a C sequestration of 81 kgC/ha/year in the clayey loam over chalk. 

There were few differences across the three main soil types on the CC impact. For potato crop only, the 
effect of the soil type on soil C dynamic was stronger than for the catch crop. Actually, the influence of soil 
type on soil C dynamics was limited because their properties were rather close in the AMG parameterization 
(texture, organic matter and CaCO3 content). 

 

Table 2. Influence of soil type and catch crop on soil carbon variations expressed per t of potato produced. 
(a negative value indicates a soil C release corresponding to a CC impact increase) 

Soil type 
(ordered by their area 
share) 
1. deep clayey loam* 
2. deep loam 
3. clayey loam over chalk  

Soil carbon dynamic contribution to climate change impact 
Without catch crop effect 
kg CO2-eq 
-16.7 
-19.5 
-9.8 

Including catch crop effect 
kg CO2-eq 
-2.6 
-5.6 
5.7 

% 
-15.6 
-17.8 
-9.8 

% 
-2.4 
-5 
5.7 

106.7 
109.5 
99.8 

Climate change impact 
(kg CO2 –eq) 

* Refers to the situation represented in figure 2. 

 
4. Discussion 
 
4.1 Main contributing steps and comparison with other studies 

 
The comparison with Williams’ et al. study (2010) was only possible for common indicators, as the char-
acterizing method was not the same as the one we used. The two studies showed the same order of magni-
tude for the CED impact (respectively 1.4 MJ/t for Williams et al., and 1.13 MJ/t in our case). Compared to 
the study by Williams et al., 2010, the CED proportion due to cool storage of potato is lower in our study 
(8% for transport+ farm storage here versus 49% for storage only for Williams et al.). This difference is cer-
tainly due to a limited storage for starch potato (40% of the harvested potato), contrary to a systematic one 
for food potato. In our study, the harvest step contributes to CED in the same order of magnitude as the Wil-
liams’ one (7% vs 10%). D’Arcy’s (2010) study showed on the contrary much higher energy  consumption 
than in the present study (4MJ/t vs 1.13 for us). This is probably due the much lower yield they considered 
(28.1 t/ha in average) than the 52 t/ha we used in our case study.   

0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%ClimatechangeTerrestrialacidificationFreshwatereutrophicationMarineeutrophicationCumulativeenergy demandEcotoxicityTransport to the plantTransport to the farm + storageSeedingHarvestingPesticidesPK fertilizationNitrogen fertilizationTillageSoil carbon release8th International Conference on LCA in the Agri-Food Sector, Rennes, France, 2-4 October 2012 

 
 

4.2 Soil C dynamics integration in LCA and its effect on CC impact  

 
We predicted the contribution of potato crop to soil C variations by simulating SOC dynamics with the 
AMG model. Our approach differs from Nemecek and Kägi, 2007, which is based on the C content of the 
biomass exported from the field, considering it a sink for atmospheric CO2. A widespread, more practical al-
ternative consists of considering crops as “climate-neutral”, as Schmidt et al., 2004) did in their study of flax 
production. The latter two approaches actually disregard the effects of crop cultivation on soil C dynamics, 
let alone the effects of soil type, crop rotation or climate, which play a major role in the GHG balance of ag-
ricultural crops (Ceschia et al., 2010). Using a soil C model such as AMG is a means of overcoming this lim-
itation and accurately predicts soil C sequestration or release rates. In the present example of starch potato, 
these rates may mitigate or, conversely, increase the global warming impact of crops, depending on soil type 
and  climate  conditions.  This  modelling  approach  was  then  an  alternative  to  the  French  reference  from 
Arrouays et al., 2002, who gave a single C sequestration rate for several crops. Our estimates of C release of 
0.02  Ct/DMt/year  was  far different  from  the  sequestration  of  0.008  Ct/DMt/year  given  by  Arrouays  et  al., 
2002, for French food potato. Their approach was maybe too generic to account for the specificities of starch 
potato growing in a particular supply area.  

Moreover, the AMG model includes crop rotations in its simulations of mid to long term soil C dynamics, 
and in the present case, the starch potato crop rotation always sequestrated soil C, despite the potato contri-
bution  as  a  net  C  release. This raises  the  question of  the accounting  of  crop  rotation  and  the  allocation  of 
catch crops in the soil C sequestration assessment. Indeed, as we showed for starch potato, the allocation of 
catch crop to the following main crop can result in an opposite effect on soil C dynamics. 

Beyond global warming impact assessment, another reason to use AMG is that SOC is considered a rele-
vant indicator of soil quality for LCA (Brandão et al., 2011; Milà i Canals et al., 2007a; Milà i Canals et al., 
2007b).  Thus,  accounting  for  soil  quality  in  LCA  could  be  facilitated  by  the  use  of  SOC  models  such  as 
AMG. 
 

4.3 Modelling approaches in agricultural LCA 

 
This study showed the relevance of using emission models instead of using default emission factors in the 
life-cycle inventory to account for the characteristics of  a crop supply area. Indeed this approach makes it 
possible to integrate the diversity of cropping production systems in supply areas in agricultural LCAs. Mod-
eling approaches have already proven to be able to integrate various biophysical and technical crop produc-
tion conditions in agricultural LCA, as in the studies from Adler et al., 2007; Gabrielle and Gagnaire, 2008. 
We were able to integrate the specific characteristics of crop management, logistics and storage in a supply 
area as well as its pedo-climatic characteristics by the use of the two models AMG and Pest-LCI. Beyond 
soil carbon dynamics and pesticides, crop models can provide precise assessments of in-field fluxes, and par-
ticularly N-fluxes which are highly dependent on local conditions. Nevertheless their use remains unusual, 
since they involve numerous parameters, some which are note easily available. An alternative way to these 
crop models are developed balance, such as Sundial used by Williams et al., 2010, thus limiting the parame-
terization difficulty, and at the same time integrating crop rotation, crop management practices and pedocli-
matic conditions in LCAs.  

 

5. Conclusion 
 

The approach proposed here has already been tested for a different context and for other crops, namely 
biomass feedstocks (Godard et al., 2012). It is a promising way to better account for the spatial variation of 
crop production conditions in agricultural LCA, by the integration of this variability range in model parame-
terization. This kind of approach is relevant to test new production scenarios, such as the reduction of pesti-
cide application, or the change in a crop supply and production area. It is also a good way to better account 
for geographical aspects in decision making, by providing adapted and accurate LCA results to local stake-
holders. 
 
 
 
 

8th International Conference on LCA in the Agri-Food Sector, Rennes, France, 2-4 October 2012 

6. References 
 
ADEME, 2010. Analyses de Cycle de Vie appliquées aux biocarburants de première génération consommés 
en France. Rapport final de l’étude réalisée pour le compte de l’ADEME, du MEEDD et du MAAP et de 
FranceAgriMer par Bio Intelligence Service. In French. 

Arrouays, D., Balesdent, J., Germon, J.-C., Jayet, P.-A., Soussana, J.-F., Stengel, P., 2002. Mitigation of the 
greenhouse  effect  Increasing  carbon  stocks  in  French  agricultural  soils?  Scientific  Assessment  Unit  for 
Expertise, Assessment Report by the French Institute for Agriculture Research (INRA) on request of the 
French Ministry for Ecology and Sustainable Development. Paris. 

Birkved, M., Hauschild, M. Z., 2006. PestLCI--A model for estimating field emissions of pesticides in agri-

cultural LCA. Ecological Modelling. 198 (3-4), 433-451. 

Brandão,  M.,  Milà  i  Canals,  L.,  Clift,  R.,  2011.  Soil  organic  carbon  changes  in  the  cultivation  of  energy 
crops: Implications for GHG balances and soil quality for use in LCA. Biomass and Bioenergy. 35 (6), 
2323-2336. 

Ceschia, E., Béziat, P., Dejoux, J. F., Aubinet, M., Bernhofer, C., Bodson, N., et al., 2010. Management ef-
fects on net ecosystem carbon and GHG budgets at European crop sites. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Envi-
ronment. 139 (3), 363-383. 

D'Arcy, A., O'Halloran, J., Sage, C., 2010. An LCA of potato production in Ireland: impacts on ecology and 
environment. In: Università degli studi di Bari Aldo Moro, editor. VII international conference on Life 
Cycle Assessment in the agri-food sector. Bari, Italy. 

Duparque, A., Tomis, V., Mary, B., Boizard, H., Damay, N., 2011. Le Bilan Humique AMG, pour une dé-
marche  de  conseil  fondée sur  des  cas-types  régionaux.  In  french.    10émes  rencontres  de la  fertilisation 
raisonnée et de l’analyse COMIFER-GEMAS. Reims, France. 

Godard,  C.,  Boissy,  J.,  Gabrielle,  B.,  2012.  Life-cycle  assessment  of  local  feedstock  supply  scenarios  to 

compare candidate biomass sources. Accepted to Global Change Biology Bioenergy. 

Henderson, A., Hauschild, M., van de Meent, D., Huijbregts, M., Larsen, H., Margni, M., et al., 2011. USE-
tox fate and ecotoxicity factors for comparative assessment of toxic emissions in life cycle analysis: sensi-
tivity to key chemical properties. The International Journal of Life Cycle Assessment. 16 (8), 701-709. 
IFEU, 2000. Bioenergy for Europe : Which ones fit best ? A comparative analysis for the Community. Hei-

delberg: IFEU. 

Land Use. 

Institut  de  l’élevage,  IFIP,  ITAVI,  Arvalis  Institut  du  végétal,  Cetiom,  ITB,  2010.  Guide  méthodologique 
pour l’estimation des impacts des activités agricoles sur l’effet de serre - GES’TIM. version1.2. In french. 
IPCC,  2006.  IPCC  Guidelines  for  National  Greenhouse  Gas  Inventories.  Agriculture,  Forestery  and  Other 

Milà i Canals, L., Bauer, C., Depestele, J., Dubreuil, A., Freiermuth Knuchel, R., Gaillard, G., et al., 2007a. 
Key  Elements  in  a  Framework  for  Land  Use  Impact  Assessment  Within  LCA.  International  Journal  of 
Life Cycle Assessment. 12 (1), 5-15. 

Milà i Canals, L., Romanyà, J., Cowell, S., 2007b. Method for assessing impacts on life support functions 
(LSF) related to the use of "fertile land" in Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). Journal of Cleaner Production. 
15, 1426-1440. 

Nemecek, T., Kägi, T., 2007. Life cycle inventories of Agricultural Production Systems - Data v2.0.  EcoIn-
vent  report  No.15.  Zürich  and  Dübendorf:  Agroscope  Reckenholz-Tänikon  Research  Station  ART.  pp. 
360. 

PRé Consultants, 2008. Sima Pro Database Manual, Methods library PRé Consultants. 
PRé Consultants, 2011. Sima Pro 7.3.2 software. Amersfoort, The Netherlands. 
Saffih-Hdadi, K., Mary, B., 2008. Modeling consequences of straw residues export on soil organic carbon. 

Soil Biology and Biochemistry. 40 (3), 594-607. 

Schmidt, A., Jensen, A., Clausen, A., Kamstrup, O., Postlethwaite, D., 2004. A comparative Life Cycle as-
sessment  of  building  insulation  products  made  of  stone  wool,  paper  wool  and  flax.  The  International 
Journal of Life Cycle Assessment. 9 (1), 53-66. 

Swiss Center for Life Cycle Inventories, 2010. Ecoinvent database v2.2. Tänikon, Switzerland. 
Weischmeier, W., Smith, D., 1965. Predicting rainfall-erosion losses from cropland east of the Rocky Moun-

tains: Guide for selection of practices for soil and water conservation. 

Williams, A., Audsley, E., Sandars, D., 2010. Environmental burdens of producing bread wheat, oilseed rape 
and potatoes in England and Wales using simulation and system modelling. The International Journal of 
Life Cycle Assessment. 15 (8), 855-868. 

 

